MpTelemetry-1.0 Standalone blog (#2995)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-03-10-tracing-with-microprofile-telemetry.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy
author_github: https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy
seo-title: Logs aren't always enough- Tracing your microservices made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0
seo-description: Distributed tracing helps DevOps teams keep track of requests between microservices. MicroProfile adopts OpenTelemetry Tracing to allow developers to observe requests across their distributed systems.
blog_description: Distributed tracing helps DevOps teams keep track of requests between microservices. MicroProfile adopts OpenTelemetry Tracing to allow developers to observe requests across their distributed systems.

> open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/blog/mptelemetry_diagram.png
```

> open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image-alt: MicroProfile Telemetry usage architecture
```

---
= Microservices tracing made easy with MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0
Yasmin Aumeeruddy <https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

Microservice architecture can make it more difficult to see how services depend on or affect other services, which also makes it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy. MicroProfile Telemetry helps you collect data on the paths that application requests take through services.

One way to increase observability of an application is by emitting traces. link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling, and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/microprofile-telemetry-1.0/plan[MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0] adopts OpenTelemetry tracing so your MicroProfile applications benefit from both manual and automatic traces!

Let's start with the key concepts involved in distributed tracing: 

Traces::
Traces represent requests and consist of multiple spans.
Spans::

> Spans are representative of single operations in a request and contain a name, time-related data, log messages and metadata to give information about what occurs during a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spans are representative of single operations in a request. A span contains a name, time-related data, log messages, and metadata to give information about what occurs during a transaction.
```

Context::
Context is an immutable object contained in the span data to identify the unique request that each span is a part of. This data is required for moving trace information across service boundaries, allowing developers to follow a single request through a potentially complex distributed system.
Exporters:: 
Exports are components that send data to a backend service so you can visualise and monitor the generated spans. 

You can export the data that MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 collects to link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/[Jaeger] or link:https://zipkin.io/[Zipkin]. OpenTelemetry also provides a simple logging exporter so that you can check whether spans are created by viewing the data in your console. This exporter can be helpful for debugging.

> The following diagram shows a system that consists of two services that both have applications running on Open Liberty. With MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 installed, the requests and responses generate spans and the paths between the services are monitored using their context. The spans are then exported to a dedicated backend services where they can be viewed in a user interface or the console logs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows a system that consists of two services that both have applications running on Open Liberty. With MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 installed, the requests and responses generate spans and the paths between the services are monitored using their context. The spans are then exported to dedicated backend services where they can be viewed in a user interface or the console logs. 
```

image::img/blog/mptelemetry_diagram.png[Typical mpTelemetry usage architecture]

There are multiple ways that you can collect this data: automatic instrumentation, manual instrumentation, and the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/[Open Telemetry Java Agent].

> MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 is currently released as beta content. You can download the lastest version of the Open Liberty beta link:https://openliberty.io/start/#runtime_betas[here]. In this post, we'll use a simple demo application to show you how to collect traces from multiple services. Check out the code in the following repository: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 is currently released as beta content. You can download the lastest version of the Open Liberty beta from the link:https://openliberty.io/start/#runtime_betas[Get Started] page. In this post, we'll use a simple demo application to show you how to collect traces from multiple services. Check out the code in the following repository: 
```

link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo[https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo]

Before we get started, let's get the backend set up. 
To use Jaeger, follow the  link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.39/getting-started/[Jaeger Getting Started instructions]. 

> If you would rather use Zipkin, you can follow the steps link:https://zipkin.io/pages/quickstart[the Zipkin Quickstart].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would rather use Zipkin, you can follow the link:https://zipkin.io/pages/quickstart[Zipkin Quickstart].
```

## Automatic instrumentation

MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0 allows you to observe traces without modifying source code in your Jakarta RESTful web service (aka JAX-RS) applications. 

As you can see in the `system` service in the demo application, you can enable `mpTelemetry-1.0` in your link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/system/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L5[server.xml]: 

[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-1.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> By default, MicroProfile Telemetry tracing is off. To enable any tracing aspects, specify `otel.sdk.disabled=false` as a config property or `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` as an environment property for your server. This property is enabled in the demo link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventoy/src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties#L2[microprofile-config.properties]  file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, MicroProfile Telemetry tracing is off. To enable any tracing aspects, specify `otel.sdk.disabled=false` as a MicroProfile Config property or `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` as an environment variable for your server. This property is enabled in the demo link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventoy/src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties#L2[microprofile-config.properties]  file.
```

For more information on these properties, see link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/sdk-environment-variables.md[OpenTelemetry's configuration documentation].

> Open a new command-line session and navigate to the `system` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, open a new command-line session and navigate to the `system` directory:
```

`cd system`

Start the `system` service: 

`mvn liberty:run`

Navigate to the system properties endpoint: 

`http://localhost:9080/system/properties`

> A span for this request will be automatically created by MicroProfile Telemetry. Check for the span in the exporter's endpoint. For example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A span for this request will be automatically created by MicroProfile Telemetry. Check for the span in your chosen exporter's endpoint. For example: 
```

image::img/blog/mptelemetry_system_span.png[System span]

You just collected traces using Automatic Instrumentation! However, you might want to annotate selected methods or collect custom telemetry data. It's now time to modify source code to add more data to your spans. 

## Manual instrumentation

> The automatic instrumentation only instruments Jakarta RESTful web service applications. To get further spans on other operations, such as database calls, manual instrumentation can be added to the source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The automatic instrumentation only instruments Jakarta RESTful web service applications. To get further spans on other operations, such as database calls, you can add manual instrumentation to the source code.
```

Before instrumenting your code, the following prerequisites are required:

* Third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the 
link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/system/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L11-L14[server.xml]: 

[source, xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-inventory.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

* The OpenTelemetry API and OpenTelemetry Instrumentation Annotations must be provided as dependencies to your build path. For example, with Maven, we add the following to the link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/pom.xml#L39-L47[`pom.xml`] file.

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
    <version>1.19.0</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-instrumentation-annotions</artifactId>
    <version>1.19.0-alpha</version>
</dependency>
----

### Code Instrumentation

> Now you are all set to instrument your code to manually create traces. We start by link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryResource.java#L38-L42[`injecting a Tracer and Span`] object: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you are all set to instrument your code to manually create traces. We start by link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryResource.java#L38-L42[injecting a Tracer and Span] object: 
```

Span getPropertiesSpan;
----

This can then be used to create spans. For example, a span called `GettingProperties` starts and an event is added before the `system` service is called: 

[source,java]
----
getPropertiesSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("GettingProperties").startSpan();
Properties props = manager.get(hostname);
try(Scope scope = getPropertiesSpan.makeCurrent()){
    ...
    getPropertiesSpan.addEvent("Received properties");
}
finally{
    getPropertiesSpan.end();
}
----

You can also create new spans by annotating methods in any Jakarta CDI beans using link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/annotations/[`@WithSpan`]. The link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L47-L48[InventoryManager.java] file in the demo application creates a span when a new system is added to the inventory. The `hostname` method parameter is annotated with the `@SpanAttribute` annotation to indicate that it is part of the trace: 

[source, java]
----
@WithSpan
public void add(@SpanAttribute(value = "hostname") String hostname, Properties systemProps) {
    ...
}
----

> A span created using the `@WithSpan` annotation can be given a name. For example, link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L58[this span] is given the name "list":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A span created using the `@WithSpan` annotation can be given a name. For example, link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/inventory/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/inventory/InventoryManager.java#L58[this span] is given the name `list`:
```

You can attach the JAR by adding the following to your `pom.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
<!-- Plugin to package opentelemetry java agent -->
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-dependency-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>3.3.0</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <id>copy</id>
            <phase>package</phase>
            <goals>
                <goal>copy</goal>
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
    <configuration>
        <artifactItems>
            <artifactItem>
                <groupId>io.opentelemetry.javaagent</groupId>
                <artifactId>opentelemetry-javaagent</artifactId>
                <version>1.19.0</version>
                <type>jar</type>
                <outputDirectory>src/main/liberty/config</outputDirectory>
                <destFileName>opentelemetry-javaagent.jar</destFileName>
            </artifactItem>
        </artifactItems>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

You can then run Maven with the `package` goal, which copies the OpenTelemetry Java Agent into your server config: 

`mvn package` 

> Add the following line to your `jvm.options` file along with the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/[agent configuration]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following line to your `jvm.options` file, along with the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/[agent configuration]:
```
